# sudoko
Interactive Sudoku program with an ILP (Integer Programming) solver component. 

The interaction should be done via console commands. The user will interact with the program by typing commands from a list provided below, along with desired parameters. Below described which commands are available in which mode of the program, as well as the specific details and arguments of each command. 
The program repeatedly prompts for user commands. Before any command, the program prints a prompt to the user to enter a command, and then awaits a user command. The prompt is repeated after every user input (valid, invalid, blank line, etc.), after the output of the previous command is fully printed. 

1. solve X . Starts a puzzle in Solve mode, loaded from a file with the name "X", where X includes a full or relative path to the file. This command is always available, in Solve, Edit, and Init modes. Any unsaved work on the current game board is lost. 
 
2. edit [X] . Starts a puzzle in Edit mode, loaded from a file with the name "X", where X includes a full or relative path to the file. The parameter X is optional. If no parameter is supplied, the program enter Edit mode with an empty 9x9 board. There is no command to create a board of different size (the user must edit a file for that, explained later). Recall that in Edit mode we always mark errors, regardless of the value of the "mark errors" parameter (which remains whatever value it contained previously). This command is always available, in Solve, Edit, and Init modes. Any unsaved work on the current game board is lost. 
 
3. mark_errors X . Sets the "mark errors" setting to X, where X is either 0 or 1. This command is only available in Solve mode.  
 
4. print_board a. Prints the board to the user. b. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes.  
 
5. set X Y Z . Sets the value of cell <X,Y> to Z. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes. Indices and values are 1-based. The user may empty a cell by setting Z=0.In solve mode, fixed cells may not be updated.Recall that an erroneous input (such as entering 5 when column X already contains 5) is allowed (but might be marked when printing the board if in Solve mode and the "mark errors" parameter is set to 1). In Solve mode, after the game board is printed, if this is the last cell to be filled then the board is immediately checked. If the check fails, we remain in Solve mode (the user can undo the move to continue solving) and we notify the user that the solution is erroneous. Otherwise, we notify the user that the puzzle was solved successfully, and the game mode is set to Init. 
  
6. validate . Validates the current board using ILP, ensuring it is solvable. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes. If the board is erroneous, the program prints an error message and the command is not executed. The command prints whether the board is found to be solvable, or not. 
 
7. guess X . Guesses a solution to the current board using LP (not ILP!), with threshold X. This command is only available in Solve mode. The parameter X is a float and represents the threshold we use for the LP solution. If the board is erroneous, the program prints an error message and the command is not executed. The command fills all cell values with a score of X or greater. If several values hold for the same cell, randomly choose one according to the score (i.e., a score of 0.6 has double the chance of 0.3).
 
8. generate X Y . Generates a puzzle by randomly filling X empty cells with legal values, running ILP to solve the board, and then clearing all but Y random cells. This command is only available in Edit mode. If the board does not contain X empty cells, then that is an error and the user should be notified. To generate a board: randomly choose X cells and fill each selected cell with a random legal value. Then, run ILP to solve the resulting board. After the board is solved, randomly choose Y cells out of the entire board and clear the values of all other cells (i.e., except the Y chosen cells). If one of the X randomly-chosen cells has no legal value available, or the resulting board has no solution (i.e., the ILP solver fails), the board reset back to its original state (before executing the command) and repeat the previous step. After 1000 such iterations, it is treat like error in the puzzle generator. 
 
9. undo. Undo a previous move done by the user. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes. Set the current move pointer to the previous move and update the board accordingly. This does not add or remove any item to/from the list, only updates our pointer into the list. If there are no moves to undo, it is an error. If there was a move to undo, clearly print to the user the change that was made. The value of empty cells (with a value of 0) printed as "0". 
 
10. redo. Redo a move previously undone by the user. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes. Set the current move pointer to the next move and update the board accordingly. This does not add or remove any item to/from the list, only updates our pointer into the list. If there are no moves to redo, it is an error. If there was a move to redo, clearly print to the user the change that was made. The value of empty cells (with a value of 0) can be printed as "0". 
 
11. save X . Saves the current game board to the specified file, where X includes a full or relative path to the file. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes.  In Edit mode, erroneous boards may not be saved. In Edit mode, boards without a solution may not be saved. Validate the board before saving and notify accordingly. File formats for save files are described below. Saving the puzzle to a file does not modify the Redo/Undo list in any way, and a reset command (described below) will still revert to the state of the originally loaded file. In Edit mode, cells containing values are marked as "fixed" in the saved file. 
 
12. hint X Y . Give a hint to the user by showing the solution of a single cell X,Y. This command is only available in Solve mode. If the board is erroneous, cell <X,Y> is fixed, or cell <X,Y> already contains a value, it is an error (in that order).  Run ILP to solve the board. If the board is unsolvable, it is an error. Otherwise, print to the user the value of cell <X,Y> found by the ILP solution. 
 
13. guess_hint X Y . Show a guess to the user for a single cell X,Y. This command is only available in Solve mode. If the board is erroneous, cell <X,Y> is fixed, or cell <X,Y> already contains a value, it is an error (in that order). Run LP for the current board. If the board is unsolvable, it is an error. Otherwise, print to the user all legal values of cell <X,Y> and their scores. Print only values with a score greater than 0. 
  
14. num_solutions. Print the number of solutions for the current board. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes. If the board is erroneous it is an error. Run an exhaustive backtracking for the current board. The exhaustive backtracking algorithm exhausts all options for the current board, instead of terminating when a solution is found . Once done, the program prints the number of solutions found by the algorithm. 
 
15. autofill . Automatically fill "obvious" values – cells which contain a single legal value. This command is only available in Solve mode. If the board is erroneous it is an error. Go over the board and check the legal values of each empty cell. If a cell <X,Y> has a single legal value, fill it with the value and notify the user of the update. Repeat for all cells in the board. Only cells that had a single legal value before the command was executed should be filled, e.g., if cell <5,5> has two legal values, but by updating cell <4,5> we eliminate one of the legal values of cell <5,5>, then cell <5,5> should not be auto-filled! Some cells may be filled by values that are erroneous (two neighbors with the same legal value) – that is OK!. After performing this command, additional cells may contain obvious values. However, this command performs only a single iteration and these cells should not be filled.  
 
16. reset . Undo all moves, reverting the board to its original loaded state. This command is only available in Edit and Solve modes. The command goes over the entire undo/redo list and reverts all moves (no output is provided). The undo/redo list is not cleared, just move our pointer to the head of the list, as if the user entered multiple "undo" commands. This command has no output (except printing the board once done). 
 
17. exit. Terminates the program. All memory resources be freed, and all open files be closed. Print an exit message. This command is always available, even in Solve and Edit modes. Any unsaved work is lost. 

Enjoy !
